---
title: Level Up Your Serverless Game
author: Lena Fuhrimann
comments: true
date: 2025-09-25
---

Is your serverless project running into unexpected snags? You're not alone. From
basic misconfigurations to frustrating deployment nightmares, we've seen the
same pitfalls trap countless teams. This guide is your cheat sheet to avoiding
those common mistakes and accelerating your journey to serverless mastery. Think
of each level as a lesson learned—a mistake you don't have to make. From basic
misconfigurations to complex deployment nightmares, the patterns are
frustratingly consistent. We've compiled this blog post to help you avoid these
common pitfalls and accelerate your journey to serverless excellence. Think of
each level as a lesson learned, a mistake you don't have to make. To learn more
about the details and apply the learnings yourself, follow our open source
[Serverless Workshop](https://github.com/bespinian/serverless-workshop). This
blog post as well as the workshop both use AWS Lambda but the learnings can be
applied to any function as a service (FaaS) platform. Now, let's dive in.

## Level 0 - This is easy!

**⚠️ Mistake: None yet**

To get started, we need to create our first function. Many projects jump into
complex architectures without understanding the fundamentals, leading to
confusion and wasted effort. This level is about demystifying the basic
mechanics of serverless: understanding how to create a function, configure its
runtime, and pass parameters using environment variables. You should also get
acquainted with your cloud provider's permission model, a cornerstone of secure
serverless applications. By adding an HTTP trigger through an API gateway, you
can transform our function into a web-accessible service, making it tangible and
interactive.

**✅ Start as simple and small as possible and take it from there.**

## Level 1: Loggin' it!

**⚠️ Mistake: Lack of structured logging**

Having deployed our first function, we have no idea what it does and if it
succeeds or not. When things go wrong, it's very hard to debug and investigate
issues. Many serverless projects suffer from poor observability, making
troubleshooting a nightmare. Using structured logging (e.g., formatted as JSON),
we get a set of logs that we can query and which give us custom insights into
what our function does. We'll know if it succeeds or fails in doing so and get
context about what went wrong if things don't go as expected. Such a log line
could look as follows:

```json
{
  "correlationId": "9ac54d82-75e0-4f0d-ae3c-e84ca400b3bd",
  "requestId": "58d9c96e-ae9f-43db-a353-c48e7a70bfa8",
  "commitHash": "9d9154e",
  "level": "INFO",
  "requestPath": "/users/1",
  "requestMethod": "GET",
  "responseCode": 200,
  "responseBody": "All good"
}
```

**✅ Don't wait until production issues arise to implement structured logging.**

## Level 2: Tracin' it!

**⚠️ Mistake: Lack of distributed tracing**

As your serverless applications grow, understanding the flow of requests becomes
critical. Distributed tracing provides invaluable insights into performance
bottlenecks and errors. Most cloud providers provide comprehensive toolsets to
easily add tracing IDs and even trace HTTP calls and other function calls by
just adding a couple of lines of code. Therefore, it's usually quite cheap to
add tracing and the value it provides is quite large. A low-hanging fruit you
shouldn't miss out on.

**✅ Activate distributed tracing for all your functions.**

## Level 3: Timin' it!

**⚠️ Mistake: Function timeouts not handled gracefully**

Functions operate within time constraints, making it essential to handle
timeouts gracefully. Unhandled timeouts can lead to unexpected behavior and data
inconsistencies. We need to ensure our functions terminate cleanly and
predictably, even when approaching their time limits. To achieve that, simply
monitor the remaining execution time and implement mechanisms for aborting
long-running operations with enough time left. This allows to either perform a
proper cleanup or partial results instead, ensuring a smooth and reliable user
experience.

**✅ Don't let timeouts cause chaos in your application.**

## Level 4: Optimized Cold Starts!

**⚠️ Mistake: Ignoring cold start performance**

Cold starts, the initial latency experienced when a Lambda function is invoked
after a period of inactivity, can impact performance. In latency-sensitive
applications, even a few extra milliseconds can be noticeable to users. This
level explores techniques to minimize cold start times, such as moving
initialization code outside the handler. By optimizing our function's startup
process, we can enhance responsiveness and improve the overall user experience.

**✅ Optimize for cold starts early to avoid performance bottlenecks later.**

## Level 5: Decoupled!

⚠️ Mistake: Tight coupling

As your serverless applications grow, the need for asynchronous communication
becomes essential. Without it, services are often tightly coupled, meaning a
failure in one can cause a domino effect of failures throughout your entire
system. This level introduces Amazon SQS, a simple yet powerful message queuing
service. Think of it as a waiting room for messages; your function can drop off
a message and move on to other tasks, while another function can pick it up
later when it's ready. This decoupling creates more scalable and resilient
architectures, making your application much more robust.

✅ Use message queues like SQS to decouple services and build a more resilient
system.

## Level 6: Infrastructure as Code!

⚠️ Mistake: Manual infrastructure management

Managing cloud resources manually is slow, inconsistent, and highly prone to
human error. It's a recipe for chaos, especially as your application scales.
This level is all about adopting Infrastructure as Code (IaC) using a tool like
Terraform. By defining your serverless functions and their dependencies in a
configuration file, you can treat your infrastructure like any other code. This
means repeatable, version-controlled deployments that are consistent across all
your environments.

✅ Stop clicking around in the console and start managing your infrastructure
with code.

## Level 7: Testing it All!

⚠️ Mistake: Lack of testing

Developing without a safety net is risky business. Untested code is a disaster
waiting to happen and can lead to bugs, unexpected behavior, and production
outages. This level tackles the critical practice of unit testing and local
execution for your functions. By writing tests that check your code's behavior
and running them locally, you can catch errors early and ensure your functions
are reliable before they ever hit production.

✅ Don't just hope your code works—test it to be sure.

## Level 8: Securin it!

⚠️ Mistake: Overly permissive roles

Giving a function more permissions than it needs is like handing out a master
key to your entire house. It creates a massive security vulnerability. This
level is about applying the principle of least privilege, which means granting
your functions only the absolute minimum permissions required to do their job.
By meticulously defining and restricting access, you significantly reduce the
potential damage from a security breach and strengthen your application's
overall security posture.

✅ Implement the principle of least privilege to lock down your serverless
functions.

## Level 9: The Gradual Rollout!

⚠️ Mistake: Risky deployments

Deploying a new version of your application to 100% of your users at once is a
high-stakes gamble. If there's a problem, everyone feels the pain immediately.
This level introduces a safer approach: canary deployments. Using a service like
AWS CodeDeploy, you can automatically release a new version to a small subset of
your users first. If the new version performs well, you can gradually roll it
out to the rest. If not, you can roll it back quickly, minimizing the impact of
any errors.

✅ Minimize deployment risk by gradually rolling out new changes to your users.
